Going back to our HTML that doesn't
look so weird like the other one.
So it's just an HTML.
So forget about the templates for
now we will see that later but
the rest is just HTML.
Nothing really important.
I don't have any JavaScript file.
The only JavaScript file
that I do have here.
It's serviceworker.js.
That is kind of empty.
This is the one that is making
the magic for the installation,
the PWA installation, okay,
that we won't cover today.
But it's not even linked at this point.
So you don't see any JavaScript file,
okay.
But before adding some
JavaScript I start rendering this.
And when I go to the console here,
and I start playing with the DOM.
So we already mentioned that we have
the document, we have the window and
we have the document.
So for example, here I can ask for
the document to the web querySelector,
and I can try to find here
all my header elements.
And it's giving me the header element.
So document.querySelector, it's actually
picking one element from the DOM.
The first one in this case with that
selector and that's a tag selector, okay?
So if we look at our code,
let me show you here.
The header we have an h1, we have nav.
And for example in the nav we have links,
these anchor elements that they have here,
the links, they have a class, for example,
they have different classes but
one is navlink.
So i can actually go and say, okay,
document.querySelector.navlink dot
because it's a class.
And it's giving me only one link.
Not both.
Why?
Because I'm using querySelector.
querySelector is always
giving you one element.
This is actually a very common mistake
when you're doing VanillaJS that you
forget that Query Selector
is giving you only one.
But we have also querySelectorAll
that returns a NodeList of 2.
So now I have both links.
Okay, so
that's how you pick elements from here.
And what if you do a querySelector or
querySelectorAll
of something that doesn't
exist like .important?
Null.
Because I don't have any
node with that class.
And what our querySelectorAll?
It's an empty NodeList, like an empty
array, not null, and we mentioned that.
When we are picking one element if
it's not there it will be null.
If you're picking multiple elements,
if no one has found is giving me
an empty array, not null, okay?
So things to have in mind when
you're dealing with these things.
And by the way, I'm always using the DOM
API over the document option, right?
But that's not completely
the only way to do that.
Let me show you this.
Going back to the elements,
I have for example here a nav, right?
And within the nav for
example I have span, okay?
So we have nav, I have a span.
So what if I wanna get to the span?
Well, I can go to console and
say document.querySelector(span).
Okay, yeah, I got the span.
It has an id, so
I can also say span with id badge.
Is it working?
Yes, I'm getting the object in return,
so it works,
but we are making a query
in the whole document,
which might be a good idea or not.
In fact, most people complaining
on the performance on VanillaJS
is because they're always querying
the document and not specific parts.
I could say, for example, that I wanna
first get, in this case the nav.
So I can do a querySelector and
get the nav element, okay, like so.
I can store that into a variable and
then I don't need to use
document.querySelector.
I can use nav.querySelector
because the DOM API is not just
available in the DOM document object,
also it's available in every DOM element.
So now I can query only within the nav.
Make sense?
So yeah, we did two queries, but
of course, because it is a variable,
this is like caching the reference.
So I can then store that nav object and
use it many times later.
To then find elements in that,
like fragment of the document.
Remember that someone asked
about document fragment.
Well, this is kind of the same idea
where document fragment is like
a separate option.
But we can then query for
specific parts of the documents.
So we are narrowing the query for
being more performant, okay.
So all the API that we have seen is
actually available on every node option,
not just in document.
So when you understand how this work,
your brain will start organizing.
Okay, how can I do things in my page?
Okay, mostly we, I mean we are going
to talk about performance and
we're going to explain where and
which parts performance is an issue.
Okay, but we want specifically today,
like the most performant solution
because we are learning from scratch.
It's better to learn
the basic concepts and
then maybe get deeper into performance.
But this is a very simple way
to understand the difference,
sometimes searching the document
will take more time.
Of course that different browsers we have
different techniques to make that faster.
Anyway, you know that there are browsers
that are faster than other browsers.
And why is that?
Well, they implement things differently.
For example, they might implement
different indexes on when you're searching
with querySelector generally find
elements faster or things like that.
You can also start your project
by creating references,
like storing variables of all
the elements that you will use a lot so
that you don't need to query those
objects with a kind of a lazy load.
You can prefetch those queries beforehand,
okay, just by creating variables.
Does it make sense?
Okay, and
remember that we are querying here.
We are working with the DOM,
not with our original HTML.
So we are working with a dynamic
structure that we have in memory.